This book provides a comprehensive survey on problems, datasets, and meth- ods in computer vision for autonomous vehicles. Towards this goal, we con- sidered the historically most relevant literature as well as the state of the art on several relevant topics, including recognition, reconstruction, motion estimation, tracking, scene understanding, and end-to-end learning. We dis- cussed open problems and current research challenges in each of these areas and also provided a novel in-depth analysis of the KITTI benchmark.

While self-driving vehicles have a long history, it remains difficult to make predictions when self-driving vehicles will hit the consumer market. Tradi- tionally, the problems involved in achieving or surpassing human-level perfor- mance on this task have been underestimated. Difficulties include the high ac- curacy that needs to be attained, the robustness required for safe self-driving as well as adverse weather conditions (snow, rain, night). Furthermore, most self-driving systems rely on accurate HD maps for localization and detection of static infrastructure, which are hard to create and to maintain up-to-date. In addition, some of the most challenging scenarios are less structured (park- ing areas, complex roundabouts) and thus need to be mastered without HD maps. Pedestrians pose another challenge to self-driving vehicles as their be- havior is often erratic, and communication with them can be key for making a driving decision. Other challenges include complex planning tasks such as merging into traffic and negotiating with other vehicles. Further, several eth- ical and legal questions need to be addressed before self-driving vehicles can be deployed in large numbers on public roads.

From a technical perspective, modular pipelines offer the advantage of par- allelization, interpretability, and ease of introducing prior knowledge. How- ever, human-engineered modules often rely on heuristics or intuitions, which may be inaccurate or wrong. Learning driving policies from data is an at- tractive alternative, however bridging the gap to modular and interpretable systems as well as attaining human-level performance remain unsolved prob- lems to date. A particularly challenging problem is generalization to unseen environments and to handle rare events for which little data is available.

We are at an exciting time where self-driving technology receives con- siderable attention and progress is fast. At the same time, it is of prime importance that we stay objective and cautious with the claims that we make in order not to gamble people’s trust in this new technology or put people’s lives at stake. Writing a survey on this rapidly evolving field was a major tour de force. We are well aware that some of the approaches surveyed in this work might be outdated in the near future. However, some of the works presented in this survey will stand the test of time and will be remembered as landmarks in the development of autonomous vehicles. We hope that this survey, in combination with our online navigation tool1, will become useful references, encourage new research, and ease the entry for beginners starting in this exciting field.